## Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Summarised Dataset

### Source
The original unsummarised dataset can be obtained from the following link:

http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset

Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz(1,2), Davide Anguita(1), Alessandro Ghio(1), Luca Oneto(1) and Xavier Parra(2)

1 - Smartlab - Non-Linear Complex Systems Laboratory
DITEN - Università degli Studi di Genova, Genoa (I-16145), Italy.

2 - CETpD - Technical Research Centre for Dependency Care and Autonomous Living
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (BarcelonaTech). Vilanova i la Geltrú (08800), Spain
activityrecognition '@' smartlab.ws 

### Study Design

The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually.

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain.

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals. These time domain signals were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals. Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm. 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing the frequency domain signals. 

The dataset is then summarised by taking the average mean and average standard deviation of each vector for each activity and each subject. Other variables of the vectors are excluded from the summarised dataset.

The steps taken in summarising the original dataset are as follows:

1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set. (The source dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data.)
2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.
3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names.
5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject

See run_analysis.R for more detailed explanations.

The summarised dataset was generated by running run_analysis.R on R version 3.1.2 running on Windows XP.

### Code Book

The summarised dataset contains 68 variables. All variables except subject and activity are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].

1. Subject: Categorical. Identifier of the subject who performed the activity. Its range is from 1 to 30. 

2. Activity: Categorical. Type of activity performed by the subject. The values are: 
    + WALKING
    + WALKING_UPSTAIRS
    + WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
    + SITTING
    + STANDING
    + LAYING

3. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_X_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

4. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_Y_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

5. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_Z_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

6. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_X_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

7. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_Y_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

8. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_Z_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

9. Time.Domain_Gravity.Acceleration.Signal_X_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of gravity acceleration signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

10. Time.Domain_Gravity.Acceleration.Signal_Y_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of gravity acceleration signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

11. Time.Domain_Gravity.Acceleration.Signal_Z_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of gravity acceleration signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

12. Time.Domain_Gravity.Acceleration.Signal_X_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of gravity acceleration signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

13. Time.Domain_Gravity.Acceleration.Signal_Y_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of gravity acceleration signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

14. Time.Domain_Gravity.Acceleration.Signal_Z_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of gravity acceleration signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

15. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_X_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

16. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_Y_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

17. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_Z_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

18. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_X_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

19. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_Y_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

20. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_Z_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

21. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_X_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body angular velocity signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

22. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_Y_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body angular velocity signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

23. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_Z_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body angular velocity signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

24. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_X_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

25. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_Y_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

26. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_Z_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

27. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Jerk.Signal_X_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body angular velocity Jerk signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

28. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Jerk.Signal_Y_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body angular velocity Jerk signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

29. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Jerk.Signal_Z_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body angular velocity Jerk signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

30. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Jerk.Signal_X_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity Jerk signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

31. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Jerk.Signal_Y_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity Jerk signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

32. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Jerk.Signal_Z_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity Jerk signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

33. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Magnitude_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

34. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Magnitude_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

35. Time.Domain_Gravity.Acceleration.Magnitude_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of gravity acceleration magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

36. Time.Domain_Gravity.Acceleration.Magnitude_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of gravity acceleration magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

37. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Magnitude_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration Jerk magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

38. Time.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Magnitude_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration Jerk magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

39. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Magnitude_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body angular velocity magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

40. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Magnitude_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

41. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Jerk.Magnitude_Mean.Value: Continuous. Time domain. Mean value of body angular velocity Jerk magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

42. Time.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Jerk.Magnitude_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Time domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity Jerk magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

43. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_X_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

44. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_Y_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

45. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_Z_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

46. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_X_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

47. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_Y_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

48. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Signal_Z_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

49. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_X_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

50. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_Y_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

51. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_Z_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

52. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_X_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

53. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_Y_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

54. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Signal_Z_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration Jerk signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

55. Freq.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_X_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body angular velocity signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

56. Freq.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_Y_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body angular velocity signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

57. Freq.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_Z_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body angular velocity signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

58. Freq.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_X_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity signals in X direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

59. Freq.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_Y_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity signals in Y direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

60. Freq.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Signal_Z_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity signals in Z direction for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

61. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Magnitude_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

62. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Magnitude_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

63. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Magnitude_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body linear acceleration Jerk magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

64. Freq.Domain_Body.Linear.Acceleration.Jerk.Magnitude_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body linear acceleration Jerk magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

65. Freq.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Magnitude_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body angular velocity magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

66. Freq.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Magnitude_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

67. Freq.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Jerk.Magnitude_Mean.Value: Continuous. Frequency domain. Mean value of body angular velocity Jerk magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

68. Freq.Domain_Body.Angular.Velocity.Jerk.Magnitude_Standard.Deviation: Continuous. Frequency domain. Average standard deviation of body angular velocity Jerk magnitude calculated using the Euclidean norm for all the window samples of the same activity performed by the subject.

## License

Use of this dataset in publications must be acknowledged by referencing the following publication [1] 

[1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

This dataset is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any commercial use is prohibited.

Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Davide Anguita. November 2012.
